3.13] how he jingled when he walked: Peter Wolfe hears an echo from
Edward Arlington Robinson's poem "Richard Corey" (". . . and he glittered
when he walked": A Vision of His Own, 151.

4.35] Engels: Ger., angels. Cf. Friedrich Engels (1820-95), co-author
with Marx of The Communist Manifesto and editor of Capital. Marx and
Engels will be alluded to several times in the novel (20.4, 115.11,
232.20, 409.27, etc.).

5.17] a Tom show: that is, a minstrel show (after Uncle Tom, the slave in
Stowe s Uncle Tom s Cabin.

7.28] And Sousa's Band? John Philip Sousa (1854-1932), "the March King,"
composer of songs, operettas and especially marches, among them the
official march of The United States, "The Stars and Stripes Forever." He
was the conductor of a famous band which was known as Sousa's Band. [AZ]

9.5] Rachmaninoff [...] had his fingers insured: Sergei Wassilievitch
Rachmaninoff (1873-1943), Russian composer and pianist, a resident of New
York after 1918.

9.25] Tannersville: small town in New York's Catskills Mountains.

11.14] res gestae: Lat., basic facts.

11.22] Maurice Ravel: French composer (1875-1937).

12.30] Philoctetes: as Gaddis explained to interviewer Lloyd Grove: "He
was the hero with the bow, the great champion of the Greeks, who goes
into the sacred garden where he's not supposed to be and is bitten by the
snake, and has a festering wound and they get rid of him, they exile him.
Then, when there's trouble and they need him and his bow, Ulysses and the
prince [Achilles' son Neoptolemus] come and say, ‘Please, come and help
us.' And that idea has always fascinated me" ("Harnessing the Power of
Babble," Washington Post, 23 August 1985, B10). Philoctetes is the
subject of plays by Sophocles and Gide and of Edmund Wilson's essay "The
Wound and the Bow." See J R 117.

16.25] At the Jewish temple, rehearsing Wagner: highly ironic, of course,
in light of Wagner's pronounced anti-Semitism.

17.22] the devil paying the piper for all the good tunes: complaining of
the popularity of folk music over hymns, the Reverend Rowland Hill
(1744-1833) "did not see any reason why the devil should have all the
good tunes" (quoted in The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations, Gaddis'
probably source.). But Julia seems to be confusing this quotation with
the proverb "He who dances must pay the piper."

18.21] the lenses, erasing any life behind the cf. this passage from
George Orwell's "Politics and the English Language" (1946): "When one
watches some tired hack on the platform mechanically repeating familiar
phrases . . . one often has a curious feeling that one is not watching a
live human being but some kind of dummy: a feeling which suddenly becomes
stronger at moments when the light catches the speaker's spectacles and
turns them into blank discs which seem to have no eyes behind them" (
Collected Essays, vol. 4 [New York: Harcourt, Brace& World, 1968],
135-36]). Throughout J R Gaddis protests against the same misuse of
language that Orwell does in this classic essay.

18.27] Ring: Richard Wagner's operatic tetralogy The Ring of the Nibelung
, first produced in its entirety in 1876. See 32.14 ff. (An audio excerpt
from the Prelude—described on p. 111 as "that E flat chord that [...]
goes on for a hundred and thirty-six bars until the idea that
everything's happening under water is more real than sitting in a hot
plush seat with tight shoes on.")

19.24] twenty-four dollars: the sum the Dutch settlers Paid the Manhattan
tribe for their island, as Christopher Knight points out (Hints and
Guesses, chap. 2).

20.4]  EBFM SAOH AQQFBR: Greek letter substitutions for the English
phrase "FROM EACH ACCORD. . ." -- from Marx's famous formulation in
Critique of the Gotha Program (1875): "From Each according to his
abilities, to each according to his needs." The inscription is identified
as Marx's at 409.27.

20.18] Mister Gibbs: takes his name from the American physicist Josiah
Willard Gibbs (1839-1903). See Norbert Wiener's The Human Use of Human
Beings (one of Gaddis's source books for J R) for Gibbs's importance,
especially regarding entropy.

20.20] Energy may be changed but not destroyed: this film and the
discussion that follows are concerned with the laws of thermodynamics and
especially the related concept of entropy: the measure of disorder in a
closed system.

21.41] Horatio Alger: the author (1832-99) of nearly 130 popular books
for boys, many concerned with a boy's rise from poverty to prosperity due
to hard work and clean living. See 575.29.

21.43] "that confidence [...] has yet come to me . . ." later identified
as the words of 34th president Dwight Eisenhower (see 51.18-19). Hyde
echoes this phrase at the bottom of p. 24.

25.13] Is Seder a holiday?: no, a ceremonial feast held on the first
night of Passover.

30.30] Miss Rheingolds: in the 1940s and '50s, Liebmann Breweries, the
makers of Rheingold Beer, sponsored a yearly competition for a Miss
Rheingold; the winner was pictured on their beer cans.

32.14] Rhine . . . G O L D!: from the first scene of Wagner's music drama
Das Rheingold (first produced in 1869), translated The Rhinegold in
English criticism. Gaddis's source for what follows is the synopsis in
Gustave Kobbé's well-known Complete Opera Book, rev. ed. (New York:
Putnam's, 1935), as the following verbal parallels indicate: ●


32.17: —This is your shout of        Kobbé 151: With shouts of triumph
triumph. A joyful cry.               the Rhinedaughters swim around the
                                     rock. Their cry "Rhinegold," is a
                                     characteristic motive.

32.19: The river is glittering with  Kobbé 151: As the river glitters
golden light                         with golden light

32.32: Pretend it's there            Kobbé 150: Amid the shimmering
shimmering                           accompaniment of the violins is
                                     heard on the horn the Rhinegold
                                     motive.

33.5: you come in playing the        Kobbé 151: the Rhinegold Motive
Rhinegold motif                      rings out brilliantly on the
                                     trumpet.

33.35: down the keyboard Bast        Kobbé 150: In wavy sport the
darted                               Rhinedaughters dart

36.18: in sinister pianissimo [...]  Kobbé 151-52: The Ring Motive occurs
Bast echoed the Ring motif.          in both voice and orchestra in
                                     mysterious pianissimo (like an echo
                                     of Alberich's sinister thoughts)

36.22: the rhythms of the Nibelungs  Kobbé 152: Then is heard the sharp,
[...] sharp cadences                 decisive rhythm of the Nibelung
                                     Motive.

36.32: the cry of the dwarf was      Kobbé 152: "Hark ye floods! Love I
lost, —Hark floods! Love I renounce  renounce forever!" he cries
forever!

36.35: it crashed with the           Kobbé 152: amid the crash of the
Rhinegold motive                     Rhinegold Motive

36.17] Buffalo Gals: or "Lubly Fan," words and music by Cool White (1844)
and famous since minstrel-show days.

37.12] Clementine: words and music usually credited to Percy Montrose
(1884), elsewhere to Barker Bradford.

37.24] Dark Eyes: a 1945 jazz hit for the Gene Krupa Trio, and again the
following years for Krupa s sax man Charlie Ventura. The tune is based on
a Gypsy air of the 19^th century.

37.30] B hai: or Baha i, a religious faith developed by Baha u llah (d.
1892) from Babi, in which the essential unity of the world s religions is
stressed.

42.16] he wrote to a girl cousin: letter dated 28 February 1778; the
complete text of this extraordinary letter can be found in Letters of
Mozart and His Family, ed. A Hyatt King and Monica Carolyn, 2^nd ed. (New
York: St. Martin s Press, 1966), 1:499-501. The relevant portions are as
follows:
Mademoiselle matrés chére Cousine!
      Perhaps you think or are even convinced that I am dead? That I have
pegged out? Or hopped a twig? Not at all. Don t believe it, I implore
you. For believing and shitting are two very different things! Now how
could I be writing such a beautiful hand if I were dead? How could that
be possible? I shan t apologize for my very long silence, for you would
never believe me. [...] Ah, you re laughing! Victoria! Our arses shall be
the symbol of our peacemaking! I knew that you wouldn t be able to resist
me much longer. Why, of course, I m sure of success, even if today I
should make a mess, though to Paris I go in a fortnight or less. So if
you want to send a reply to me from the town of Augsburg yonder, you see,
then write at once, the sooner the better, so that I may be sure to
receive your letter, or else if I m gone I ll have bad luck, instead of a
letter to get some muck. Muck! Muck! Ah, muck! Sweet word! Muck! Chuck!
That too is fine. Muck, chucuck! That s what I like! Muck, chuck and
suck! Chuck muck and suck muck! [...] Well, to make a long story short,
about four hours from here I have forgotten the name of the place at some
village or other and indeed it is all one, whether the village was
Tribsterill, where muck runs into the sea, or Burmesquick, where the
crooked arseholes are manufactured in short, it was a village. [...]

43.18] a white-maned man [...] America s beloved humorist whose real
name: Samuel Langhorne Clemens, a.k.a. Mark Twain (1835-1910).

43.14] Franz Schubert [...] Robert Schumann [...] Tchaikowski: celebrated
19^th-century composers. All three anecdotes are recorded in Wallace
Brockway and Herbert Weinstock s Men of Music, rev. ed. (New York: Simon
& Schuster, 1950), Gaddis s probable source. The book notes that Schubert
was 31, not 32, at his death (266); that Schumann threw himself into the
Rhine shortly before his death in 1856 (310-11); and that at his debut as
a conductor, Tchaikowski  had the hallucination that his head was coming
off, and actually held on to it with one hand during the entire
performance. This experience so terrified him that ten years elapsed
before he had courage to repeat the experiment  (505).

43.22] Edward Mac . . .: MacDowell (1861-1908): see 225.26. (Anecdote not
recorded in Brockway and Weinstock.)

43.25] a biceped Valkyrie [...] Brünnhilde: the heroine of the second
opera in Wagner s Ring, The Valkyrie.

43.28] D-minor piano concerto of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart: K.466, since
its composition in 1785 the most famous of all his piano concerti. It is
heard again on pp. 69 ff. See also 112.41 and 707.4-5.

45.6] Empedocles [...] the second generation of his cosmogony: from
fragment 57 of the fifth-century B.C. Greek philosopher s On Nature, a
philosophical poem discussing the conflict of love and strife in the
universe. Gaddis s source seems to be G. S. Kirk and J. E. Raven s The
Presocratic Philosophers (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1960), esp.
336-38.

49.10] painter that cut off his ear: Vincent van Gogh (1853-90) once cut
off an ear to give to a prostitute.

49.42] Title Four: the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965
consisted of eight sections or  titles ; Title Four, called  Cooperative
Research,  authorized $100 million for the period 1966-74 for  federal
construction aid for educational research facilities  and for grants and/
or contracts to various kinds of research groups. {Richard Scaramelli}

50.25] maybe he hears a different drummer [...] let him step to the music
which he: from the concluding chapter of Thoreau s Walden.

52.43] Clementi trio: Muzio Clementi (1752-1832), Italian pianist and
composer.

55.5] the sweeter for being unheard melody [...] this mad pursuit of
whatever men or gods those were: from the first two stanzas of Keats s  
Ode on a Grecian Urn. 
 61.15] Norman: Norman Angel apparently takes his name from British
 economist and author Sir Norman Angell (1872-1967), inventor of  The
 Money Game. 

 63.22] Saint-Saëns: Camille Saint-Saëns (1835-1921), French composer
 and organist.

 63.28] Paderewski [...] Steinway: Ignace Paderewski (1860-1941), Polish
 pianist and (later) statesman, came to the U.S. in 1891 at the request
 of Steinway and Sons.

 63.30] Herbert Hoover was mixed up in that: in 1896 the future 31^st
 president (1874-1964) hatched a scheme to raise money for college by
 sponsoring a Paderewski concert in San Jose, California, during the
 pianist s third tour of the U.S. Gaddis s probable source is Charlotte
 Hoffman Kellog s Paderewski (New York: Viking, 1956), 80-81.
 (Paderewski s involvement with Steinway and Sons is recounted on pp.
 61-62).

 63.33] Scriabin and Madame Blavatsky: Russian mystic composer
 (1872-1915) and the Russian-born occultist (1831-91); Scriabin began
 studying Blavatsky s theosophy in 1905 and wrote his symphonic tone
 poem Le poème de l extase under its influence.

 65.41] Kreisler: Fritz Kreisler (1875-1962), Austrian-born American
 violinist.

 65.42] Siegfried Wagner: (1869-1930), composer and (from 1896) director
 of the Bayreuth Festiva; son of Richard Wagner.

 66.1] Teresa what was her name [...] known as the Valkyrie of the
 keyboard: Teresa Carreño (1853-1917), Venezuelan pianist and composer;
 recorded rolls for the player piano. Her second husband, composer and
 pianist Eugen d Albert (1864-1932), though born and raised in England,
 always considered himself a German. 

 69.10] strings foreboding in a minor key: identified on the next page
 as Mozart s d-minor piano concerto (see 43.28).

 69.25] All the spirit deeply dawning in: this and the rest of the
 poetry in this scene are from Tennyson s  Locksley Hall  (1842),
 specifically ll. 23-30:

 And I said,  My cousin Amy, speak, and speak the truth to me,
 Trust me, cousin, all the current of my being sets to thee."

 On her pallid cheek and forehead came a color and a light,
 As I have seen the rosy red flushing in the northern night.

 And she turn d her bosom shaken with a sudden storm of sighs 
 All the spirit deeply dawning in the dark of hazel eyes 

 Saying,  I have hid my feelings, fearing they should do me wrong, 
 Saying,  Dost thou love me, cousin?  weeping,  I have loved thee long. 

 70.26] Beethoven [...] Egmont: in 1810 Beethoven wrote for Goethe s
 drama Egmont incidental music consisting of an overture and eight other
 selections.

 75.1] another blue day: from Thomas Carlyle s poem  Today :  Here hath
  been dawning another blue day. / Think! Wilt thou let it slip useless
     away  (ODQ; quoted by Wyatt in The Recognitions [238.27-28]). 

 75.7] Erinyes: in Greek mythology, avengers of wrong, counterparts to
 the Roman Furies. They took the form of hideous women. 

 81.38] Mister Davidoff: perhaps takes his name from Sidney Davidoff,
 top aide to New York s mayor John Lindsay in the late 1960s and early  
 70s. Davidoff made President Nixon s 1971 list of twenty political
 enemies and was there described as  a first class SOB, wheeler-dealer,
 and suspected bagman. 

 82.23-24] the pits in this wall … left by a bomb: the bombing of the
 Morgan Bank in lower Manhattan on September 16, 1920
 (see:
 http://www.pbs.org/wnet/newyork/laic/episode5/topic1/e5_t1_s4-hm.html
 and
 http://www.thestreet.com/comment/ballotdance/10001305.html [PD/VH]

 82.24] J P Morgan: American banker and financier (1837-1913); [explain
 anecdote]

 85.27] time is money: from Benjamin Franklin s  Advice to a Young
 Tradesman  (1748)(ODQ). Repeated by Gibbs at 115.37.

 89.24] Typhon: a monster in Greek mythology with a hundred heads, each
 with a terrible voice; based on the Egyptian god Set.

 89.35] Dardanella: a syncopated foxtrot written by Fred Fisher (words)
 and Felix Bernard and Johnny S. Black (music). An early (1919) example
 of  boogie-woogie,  it was enormously popular in its day and was used
 in several movies thereafter.

 90.4] Mister Eigen: cf. eigen, Ger. self, characteristic. This
 character was originally conceived by Gaddis as a self-portrait, but
 later took on additional, fictitious characteristics.

 91.43] the lesson of the master: title of a short story by Henry James.

 97.29] Pythian s: after Pythia, priestess of Apollo at Delphi.

 98.1] don t own them you can t trust them: cf. 183.4.  

 98.5] mein Onkel soll meine Wäsche waschen . . . ?:  My uncle is to do
 (wash) my clothes. [trans. John Soutter].

 100.13] Patman hearing: in 1961, Representative Wright Patman
 (1893-1976) chaired a Select Small Business Committee probe of
 tax-exempt foundations, concluding that they were tax-avoidance havens
 and unfair competition to small business. See the 1965 report  Patman
 and Select Small Business Subcommittee on Foundations: Their Impact on
 Small Business.  {Richard Scaramelli}

 110.39] Country Gardens: a composition by Australian-born composer
 Percy Grainger (1882-1961), a hit for pianist-singer Hazel Scott in the
 1940s.

 112.44] Chopin [...] Ballade in [...] G-minor: opus 23, a popular work
 dating from 1836.

 115.11] Mister Marks?: a call for Karl Marx? so suggests Mark Madigan
 in  Marx, Entropy, and Empedocles in William Gaddis s J R  (unpublished
 paper).

 116.9] Those who can do, those who can t, teach: the well-known dictum
 is from Bernard Shaw s  Maxims for Revolutionaries  (in Man and
 Superman)(ODQ).

 116.12] Blessed is he who has found his work, let him ask no other:  .
 . . no other blessedness  from Carlyle s Past and Present (3.11)(ODQ).

 116.21] Bizet [...] condemned for being like Wagner: Kobbé notes that
 the first Parisian reviewers of Bizet s Carmen (1875) found it  too
 Wagnerian  (601) and also notes as does Gibbs on the next page that the
 opera was produced three months before Bizet s death. The opera was
 considered a failure at first, not, as Amy says,  a great success. 

 116.27] Wagner [...] the conditions he needed in order to work: these
 details are from Ernest Newman s Wagner as Man and Artist (1914; 2^nd
 rev. ed, 1924), chap. 14:  Contrarieties of Character: Love of Luxury. 
 This book, Gaddis s principal source for the Wagneriana in J R, is an
 attempt to descredit the reliability of Wagner s own Mein Leben and to
 pop many of the bubbles then cherished by Wagnerites. Although it pans
 Wagner the man, it praises Wagner the artist.

 116.32] the garden path [...] led the God damned outside world in: 
 quoting an earlier biographer, Newman writes:  he could not endure even
 books in the room he was working in, or bear to let his eyes follow the
 garden paths;  they suggested the outer world too definitely and
 prevented concentration   (New York: Vintage, 1974, 159).

 117.2] genius does what it must talent does what it can: from
 Bulwer-Lytton s poem  Last Words of a Sensitive Second-Rate Poet  (ODQ
 ).

 117.6] Ulysses [...] a real sneak [...] Philoctetes: as is Ulysses in
 Sophocles  drama; see 12.30.

 117.19] Spread the checked cloth [...] if the lady and gentleman: see
 120.32 below.

 120.32] best authority there is says just get those breasts [...]
 fragments of the afternoon: these lines and those on 117 are from T. S.
 Eliot s prose poem  Hysteria. 

 121.9] Beware women who blow on knots: see 486.23.

 130.34] loyal friend but a cunning and dangerous enemy: source unknown.

 130.42] lost in the dark caverns of her throat [...] bruised by the
 ripple of unseen muscles: also from Eliot s  Hysteria. 

 131.3] take defeat from any brazen throat: over pp. 131-32 (and
 throughout the rest of the novel) Gibbs quotes snatches from Yeats s
 poem  To a Friend Whose Work Has Come to Nothing  (from
 Responsibilities, 1914).

                  Now all the truth is out,
                  Be secret and take defeat
                  From any brazen throat,
                  For how can you compete,
                  Being honour bred, with one
                  Who were it proved he lies,
                  Were neither shamed in his own
                  Nor in his neighbours' eyes?
                  Bred to a harder thing
                  Than Triumph, turn away
                  And like a laughing string
                  Whereon mad fingers play
                  Amid a place of stone,
                  Be secret and exult,
                  Because of all things known
                  That is most difficult.

 131.38] how hard a path the going down and going up another s stair: 
 from Dante s Paradiso (17:58), as quoted in the ODQ.

 132.9] Joan of Arc voices she heard: source unknown.

 132.9] If not you, who. If not now, when [...] If not you, when!: cf.
 the famous question by Rabbi Hillel in Sayings of the Fathers:  If I am
 not for myself, who will be for me? If I am not for myself alone, what
 am I? If not now, when? 

 137.40] Piston s Harmony: Walter Piston s Harmony (3^rd ed., 1962) is a
 standard music textbook.

 142.16] sailors  chorus from Dido and Aeneas . . . you’ll never, no
 never, have to clean your: Purcell’s 1689 opera (libretto by Nahum
 Tate) features a sailors’ chorus at the opening of act 3, concluding:
 “No never intending to visit them more.” [AZ]

 142.20] Rift the hills and roll the waters! [...] Rain or hail! or
 fire: more scattered lines from Tennyson s  Locksley Hall. 

 143.33] Phil the Fluter s Ball: popular song by Percy French
 (1854-1920), Irish songwriter and parodist.

 145.31] Delius: Frederick Delius (1862-1934), English composer.

 146.1] Wagner Man and Artist: Newman s book: see 116.27.
 160.44] Statue of Liberty [...] refuse from one teeming shore: an
 allusion to the verses inscribed on the Statue of Liberty, from Emma
 Lazarus s  The New Colossus  (1883):

     Give me your tired, your poor,
     Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,
     The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.
     Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me,
     I lift my lamp beside the golden door! 

 161.18] the dawn of the world: from Empedocles  cosmogony: see 45.6.

 162.7] El hedouli [...] el modakheli [...] barake: from the The Perfumed
 Garden, a sex manual from the 16th century compiled by Umar ibn-Muhammed
 Nafzawi.

 166.30] Role Therapy and the Decision Making Process: unidentified. 

 167.37] Kidder . . . Hornblower:  Prior to its acquisition by GE in 1986,
 Kidder Peabody was an investment bank with a history dating back to the
 1850s; Hornblower Fischer & Company
 http://www.hfny.com
 also an investment bank, was founded in 1888 as Hornblower Weeks. [MR]

 170.36 Selma Krupskaya. See also 583.12 where the first name is Olga.
 Maybe an (ironic) allusion to W.I. Lenin's wife Nadezhda K. Krupskaya.
 [AZ]

 171.24] hurry up [...] it s time: cf. the pubkeeper s refrain in part 2
 of Eliot s The Waste Land.

 175.23] catching light from nowhere, his lenses went blank: see 18.21.
 [MR]

 176.16] what was his name that shot the president over a washing machine:
 unidentified

 178.36] Mongst the giants of money [...] the little church so shy, it
 whispers I am . . .: unidentified.

 179.7] I am the song the Brahmin sings [...] I am the . . .: misquoted
 from Emerson s poem  Brahma. 

 182.34] that painter of his cutting off his ear: see 49.10.

 188.5] Chloe: words by Gus Kahn, music by Neil Moret (1927), parodied by
 Spike Jones in the 1940s.

 188.15] Jack's Little Green Card: a horse-racing tipsheet popular from
 the 1940s through the 1980s. It is also perhaps the source of the
 pseudonym Jack Green, author of Fire the Bastards! and a gambling man.

 189.33] Gott-trunkener Mensch: a “God-intoxicated man” is what Novalis
 called Spinoza (ODQ).

 189.33] Mit der Dummheit k mpfen G tter selbst vergebens:  With stupidity
 the gods themselves struggle in vain  from Schiller s Jungfrau von
 Orleans (3.6)(ODQ).

 190.45] old Shirley Temple movies, Jack Haley [...] she comes out the
 other: see Poor Little Rich Girl (1936), directed by Irving Cummings.

 191.6] The Charge of the Light Brigade: Tennyson s famous poem (1854).

 194.6] The Light Cavalry Overture: from the 1866 operetta Die leichte
 Kavallerie by Austrian composer Franz Supp  (1819-95).

 194.22] The Peanut Vendor: words by L. Wolfe Gilbert and Marion Sunshine,
 music adapted by Moises Simons from the popular Latin American song  El
 Mansiero  (1931). Popularized in this country by Paul Whiteman, Guy
 Lombardo, and Xavier Cugat and their orchestras.

 194.29] a demented Virgil for the amorphous Dante: Virgil leads Dante
 through the underworld in the latter s Inferno. 
 194.6] The Light Cavalry Overture: from the 1866 operetta Die
 leichte Kavallerie by Austrian composer Franz Suppé (1819-95).

 194.22] The Peanut Vendor: words by L. Wolfe Gilbert and Marion
 Sunshine, music adapted by Moises Simons from the popular Latin
 American song  El Mansiero  (1931). Popularized in this country by
 Paul Whiteman, Guy Lombardo, and Xavier Cugat and their
 orchestras.

 194.29] a demented Virgil for the amorphous Dante: Virgil leads
 Dante through the underworld in the latter s Inferno.

 205.20] A Moveable Feast left opened to page 190: on which page F.
 Scott Fitzgerald reveals to Ernest Hemingway his suspicion of
 being underendowed. Crawley later uses Bast s  coronal extension
 measuring tape  as a bookmark for this page. Fitzgerald died in
 1940; Hemingway s Parisian memoir was published posthumously in
 1964.

 214.33] Chile regarding Kennecott: in October 1972 the Kennecott
 Copper Corporation reported a huge loss due to the write-off of
 its equity interest of $50.4-million in El Teniente Mining Company
 after Chile nationalized it (New York Times, 25 October 1972, 63).
 Kennecott made front-page news a month later when they were
 accused by the Federal Trade Commission  of violating the law that
 bans the same individual from being on the boards of directors of
 large, competing corporations  (New York Times, 25 November 1972,
 1).

 216.26] TDY . . . CIPAP: TDY = Temporary Duty.  CIPAP = Change In
 Plans Authorized Personnel..  Both terms are used and explained
 here, seventh paragraph:
 http://members.aol.com/daspopanama/
 [ Kenneth Colgan and MR]

 218.25] Don t Fence Me In: words and music by Cole Porter (1944),
 popularized by Roy Rogers.

 222.29] Saul on the road to Damascus: signifies a complete change
 of heart; see Acts 9.

 [235.1] I was thinking of Homer, Louise Homer…" American contralto
 (1871-1947), a notable Orfeo in Toscanini’s 1909 revival of
 Gluck’s opera.

 235.2] Gluck s Orfeo: Christoph Gluck s (1714-87) opera Orfeo ed
 Euridice (1762).

 236.2] White Christmas: words and music by Irving Berlin (1942),
 introduced by Bing Crosby in the movie Holiday Inn. 

 236.27] Maude Adams: American actress (1872-1953), famous for her
 starring role in Peter Pan (1906-7).

 242.40] Ja, ich bin es, beide Hälften, nicht? [...] das Hintertail
 nicht vergessen: Ger.:  Yes, I am it, both halves, isn t that so?
 ... For the head, yes? ... Ah, the newspaper? ... American art,
 right? Black art, horrible ... the blood! the war! ... Sexual
 intercourse! Shitty! ... For the lower body ... don t forget the
 rear end, eh? ... thank you, thank you. 

 244.17] the destructive element: in chap. 20 of Joseph Conrad s
 novel Lord Jim (1900), the trader Stein equates an ideal with what
 he calls  the destructive element :

  A man that is born falls into a dream like a man who falls into
 the sea. If he tries to climb out into the air as inexperienced
 people endeavor to do, he drowns nicht wahr? . . . No! I tell you!
 The way is to the destructive element submit yourself, and with
 the exertions of your hands and feet in the water make the deep,
 deep sea keep you up. So if you ask me how to be? . . . I will
 tell you! . . . In the destructive element immerse. 

 See also Stephen Spender s critical study The Destructive Element
 (1935).

 247.21] Schramm: cf Ger. Schramme: scar, abrasion.

 248.30] pick up his bed and walk like the good book says: from
 John 5:8.

 248.36] Tolstoy s something terribly lacking between what I felt
 and what I could do: from Fedya s discussion with Prince Sergius
 in Tolstoy s drama Redemption (1900), 1.4. (First used in Gaddis s
 Recognitions: 606.31.) 
256.1] AMD . . . RPSCTDY . . . AFB . . . IAW: Air Movement Designator;
Return to Proper Station upon Completion of Temporary Duty; Air Force Base; In
Accordance With.  These and other military acronyms are explained at http://
www.smdc.army.mil/PubAff/Acron.pdf
(MR)

262.41] And there [ ] amonst the stones: from Gaddis s play Once at Antietam;
see FHO 77 for the entire passage.

263.22] Better to go down dignified [...] Provide, provide: from the last
stanza of Robert Frost s poem  Provide, Provide. 

267.6] Nana had filmy eyes [...] And as Mrs Darling was . . .: from Sir J. M.
Barrie s children s classic Peter Pan (1911).

269.39] as Freud said what the hell is it you want:  The great question [...]
which I have not been able to answer, despite my thirty years of research into
the feminine soul, is  What does a woman want?   quoted in Charles Rolo s
Psychiatry in American Life (1963).

275.28] the torrents of spring: title of Hemingway s first novel (1926).

276.14] Moody s Industrials: reports on the stock activities in the
manufacturing sector.

276.42] halte l ! [...] Qui va l !: see 280.19 below.

278.11] a place of stone: Yeats: see 131.3.

278.24] Mister Grynszpan: probably named after Herschel Grynszpan, a Polish Jew
whose assassination of a minor Nazi official resulted in the notorious
Kristallnacht (9-10 November 1938).

278.40] Backward turn backward [...] make Tom Mister Grynszpan just for: from
Elizabeth Akers Allen s (1832-1911) once-popular poem  Rock Me to Sleep, Mother
 :  Backward, turn backward, O Time, in your flight, / Make me a child again,
just for to-night!  (ODQ). Full text.

280.19] Halte l  [...] Don Jos  comes marching up: from act 2 of Bizet s Carmen
(Kobb  594).

280.34] Sorrows of Young Werther: Goethe s short novel (1787), whose suicidal
hero is similar to the romantic speaker in  Locklsey Hall. 

280.39] Get to wed some savage:  Locksley Hall,  l. 168; misquoted again on the
next page (281.16).

280.43] Lucas Cranach: German painter and engraver (1472-1553), best known for
his portraits of Martin Luther and other reformers.

280.44] a sorceress by Baldung: Hans Baldung (1484?-1545), German painter and
engraver, much influenced by D rer; picture as yet unidentified.

281.6] Book I read once the girl had breasts like warm duck eggs: from Robert
S. Close's novel  Love Me Sailor , first published in Australia in 1945 and the
subject of an obscenity suit. (It was widely reprinted thereafter, including an
American mass-market in 1952.) The novel concerns the adventures of the only
woman aboard a rough ship. On page 10 of a British edition from 1972, we're
told: "She bent against the table to eat, and I knew her breasts would feel
like two warm duck eggs." {Robert Pirkola}

282.16] barake: see 162.7.

282.21] Kalevala: the Finnish national epic, compiled from popular songs and
oral tradition. It gives an account of the origin of the world, followed by the
adventures of the three sons of Kaleva.

282.22] Freya and Brisingamen: the latter is the necklace worn by Freya, Norse
goddess of love, fecundity, and death. (In Wagner s Ring, she is only the
goddess of love, with no mention of Brisingamen or her darker aspects.)

282.29] undigested Plato: in FHO we learn that portions of Once at Antietam are
paraphrases from Plato s dialogues.

282.32] agap  [ ] agape: the first mention of the title of Gaddis s posthumous
work. The opening pages of the earlier, nonfiction version of this work are
quoted on pp. 288-89, 571-72, 573, 574, 575-76, 579, 581, 585, 587, 594-95, and
604.

282.32] squeeze the universe into a ball: from Eliot s  Love Song of J. Alfred
Prufrock,  l. 92.

283.13] Tolstoy [...] what I could do: see 248.36.

284.19] Lazarus [...] come back to tell you all: also from Eliot's  The Love
Song of J. Alfred Prufrock,  ll. 94-95.

284.21] believing and shitting are two very different: see 42.18.

284.23] But turn your eyes from Lazarus [...] that must go search among the
desert places where wait, his eye: unidentified.

287.25] Beethoven told Cipriani Potter [...] because you may be tempted to
consult it: Potter (1792-1871) was Director of the Royal Music Academy in
London.  Once Beethoven advised him never to compose sitting in a room in which
there was a pianoforte, in order not to be tempted to consult the instrument;
after a work was finished he might try it over on the instrument, because an
orchestra was not always to be had  Thayer s Life of Beethoven, rev. and ed.
Elliot Forbes (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1967), 683. (Thayer s Life
does not appear to be Gaddis s source, but it does contain all of the
Beethoveniana in J R.)

288.5] Johannes Müller: “Johannes Müller the physiologist [1801-58] tried to
produce a melody by blowing through a carefully prepared larynx in which
strings and weights replaced muscular action. To save fees demanded by living
singers Müller suggested that opera companies could buy the larynxes of dead
opera stars; after proper treatment the larynxes could be made to sing the most
beautiful songs and arias”—from Alexander Buchner’s Mechanical Musical
Instruments, trans. Iris Urwin (London: Batchworth Press, 1954?), 16. This
ghoulish anecdote is also related in AA (16.15).

288.45] Please do not shoot the pianist. He is doing his best: this and much of
what follows is from Oscar Wilde s lecture  Impressions of America  (1883),
reprinted in The Annotated Oscar Wilde, ed. H. Montgomery Hyde (New York:
Clarkson Potter, 1982), 379-82.  [AW]  The passage from that work:

    "From Salt Lake City one travels over the great plains of Colorado and up
    the Rocky Mountains, on the top of which is Leadville, the richest city in
    the world. It has also got the reputation of being the roughest, and every
    man carries a revolver. I was told that if I went there they would be sure
    to shoot me or my traveling manager. I wrote and told them that nothing
    that they could do to my traveling manager would intimidate me. They are
    miners--men working in metals, so I lectured to them on the Ethics of Art.
    I read them passages from the autobiography of Benvenuto Cellini and they
    seemed much delighted. I was reproved by my hearers for not having brought
    him with me. I explained that he had been dead for some little time which
    elicited the enquiry "Who shot him?" They afterwards took me to a dancing
    saloon where I saw the only rational method of art criticism I have ever
    come across. Over the piano was printed a notice:

    PLEASE DO NOT SHOOT THE PIANIST.
    HE IS DOING HIS BEST.

    The mortality among pianists in that place is marvelous. Then they asked me
    to supper, and having accepted, I had to descend a mine in a rickety bucket
    in which it was impossible to be graceful. Having got into the heart of the
    mountain I had supper, the first course being whisky, the second whisky and
    the third whisky."

289.10] all art does constantly aspire to the condition of music: Walter Pater 
s famous formulation is from  The School of Giorgione  in The Renaissance (ODQ
).

289.13] beast with two backs: Iago s figure for fornication in Othello
(1.1.117).

289.16] leave history to bunk: echoes Henry Ford assertion:  History is bunk  (
OED).

289.29] flute is not [...] expressive of moral character [...] Aristotle: from
Benjamin Jowett s translation of the Politica (8.6).

289.31] Frank Woolworth: American merchant (1852-1919), founder of the
Woolworth chain of stores.

289.35] George Jones through McGuffey s Fourth Eclectic Reader [...] stamp
improvement on the wings of time: American educator William Holmes McGuffey
(1800-73) originated a series of readers used extensively in 19^th-century
schools; Gibbs quotes from the conclusion to a selection entitled  Consequence
of Idleness  writen by Jacob Abbott (1803-79), introduced in the Third reader
in 1837 and reprinted in the Fourth in 1857.

290.7] what Beethoven [...] wrote the countess of [...] the better among us
bear one another in mind: in a letter to Countess Therese Brunsvik dated 23
November 1810 Beethoven wrote:  Even without prompting, people of the better
kind think of each other . . .  On 2 February 1811 Therese Brunsvik sent a copy
of the letter to her sister Josephine, perhaps explaining why Thayer ascribes
it to that rather than the original date. (Thayer s Life, 504). [SM/AZ] 

293.43] Mouse Argonne: i.e., the Meuse-Argonne, site of an important battle
during World War I.

297.12] Mister Piscator: Saint Peter is called  il pescator  (the fisherman) in
Dante s Paradiso (18:136), and Piscator is the name of the angler in Izaak
Walton s Compleat Angler (1653).

303.15] Understanding Financial Statements: book by John N. Myer, originally
entitled What the Executive Should Know about the Accountant s Statements
(1964).

309.13] Niadu Airgetlam [...] of the Silver Hand [...] Nodens: in Irish
mythology, King Niadu of the Silver Hand replaced his arm lost in combat with
one of silver. He has been associated with Nodens, a sea god of Celtic Britain
whose name means  fisher,  and who consequently has also been associated with
the Fisher King of the Grail romances (see next note).

309.18] the Fisher King [...] the wasteland: the maimed king whose wound causes
his kingdom to deteriorate into a wasteland; a major figure in Jessie L. Weston
 s From Ritual to Romance

                          transition (309.36-310.19)
 Vogel talks to himself during the bus trip back to Massapequa; tries to dump
  the kids on Ann diCephalis in the school parking lot, but she escapes home.

310.11] Daisies won t tell: a turn-of-the-century song by Anita Owen:  Sweet
bunch of daisies, / Brought from the dell, / Kiss me once, darling, / Daisies
won t tell.

310.37] Custer s Last Stand: the Battle of Little Big Horn occurred on 25 June
1876 a year important to J R: Wagner s complete Ring was first performed that
year, Gibbs s notes for his Agapē Agape begin with 1876 (586); Bell patented
the telephone that year (note that on the bottom of p. 556 there s a phone bill
for $1876); and at the Philadelphia Exposition of 1876 the earliest player
piano (Forneaux s Pianista) was exhibited.

314.29] Mister Morgenthau: after Henry Morgenthau, Jr. (1891-1967), FDR s
Secretary of the Treasury.

315.24] el modakheli: see 162.7.

318.3] Danny, I hardly knew ye [...] have to be put in a bowl to beg: from the
anonymous ballad  Johnny, I Hardly Knew Ye  (also quoted in The Recognitions,
195.31 ff.).

318.21] Newcomen: Thomas Newcomen (1663-1729), English blacksmith, inventor of
an atmospheric steam engine.

318.30] James Watt: Scottish mechanical engineer (1736-1819), who improved
Newcomen s steam engine when given one to repair.

318.35] Rock of Ages [...] Augustus Montague Toplady: English clergyman
(1740-78); the famous hymn was first published in Gospel Magazine (1775).
(Lyrics and midi rendition.)

318.41] The song is ended but the malady lingers on: a take-off on the popular
song by Irving Berlin (1927). (Lyrics and "sing-along" midi rendition.)

337.23. I suppose that’s a way of putting it: cf. T.S. Eliot's Four Quartets,
"East Coker," section 2: "That was a way of putting it—not very satisfactory: /
A periphrastic study in a worn-out poetical fashion, / Leaving one still with
the intolerable wrestle / With words and meanings." [JS]

341.28. And Nanook s loosing battle against the blizzard of scratched remnants
of film Robert Flaherty s film of 1922, "Nanook of the North." See also 475.2
and 498.20.  About the film:
http://www.oneworldmagazine.org/seek/nanook/main.htm     [AZ]

341.40] Blenheim: site of historic battle fought 13 August 1704, won by
Marlborough; see 396.32.

342.7] Venice was frozen music: later identified as a line by Pater: see 527.36
.

342.8] Steady, steady now, remember Howard s sacred gore: Likely a confused
reference to the Maryland State Song, where the words "remember Howard's,"
"sacred," and "gore" occur within relatively close proximity. The full text of
the song is at http://www.netstate.com/states/symb/song/md_md_my_md.htm
Gaddis had Edmund Wilson's Patriotic Gore in his library, which has an epigraph
containing the first verse of the song, and on page 400 is a description of its
composition and character.
[Robert Pirkola]

342.20] Mrs. Carlyle [...] waked up in the middle of the night by the bed
shaking? [...] Sartor Resartus: Gaddis probably picked this anecdote up from
Frank Harris's My Life and Loves (1925), where Harris quotes Sir Richard Quain
on what Mrs. Carlyle told him about her wedding night with the Scottish writer:

"'A little later he came up, undressed and got into bed beside me. I
expected him to take me in his arms and kiss and caress me. [¶] Nothing of
the sort, he lay there, jiggling like.' ("I guessed what she meant," said
Quain, "the poor devil in a blue funk was frigging himself . . .") 'I
thought for some time,' Mrs. Carlyle went on, 'one moment I wanted to kiss
and caress him; the next moment I felt indignant. Suddenly it occurred to
me that in all my hopes and imaginings of a first night I had never got
near the reality: silent the man lay there, jiggling, jiggling. Suddenly I
burst out laughing: it was too wretched, too absurd! [¶] At once he got out
of bed with the one scornful word "Woman!" and went into the next room: he
never came back to my bed.'" (NY: Grove Press, 1963, p. 210)


342.22] Here comes Dan with all the news, got the boxback coat and the . . .:
from the song That's What I Like About the South, performed by Bob Wills and
His Texas Playboys. The relevant portion is

    Here come old Bob with all the news
    Got the boxback coat with button shoes
    But he's all caught up with his union dues
    An' that's what I like about the South.

The full text of the song and additional information can be found at
http://lyricsplayground.com/alpha/songs/t/thatswhatilikeaboutthesouth.shtml
[Robert Pirkola]

346.21] Belle Amie: in earlier drafts of the novel, beautiful Amy Joubert s
first name was spelled Amie.

346.26] when suddenly I saw your foot: identified on 348 as a line from a poem,
but source unknown.

347.42] one and two dimensional people: perhaps an allusion to Edwin A. Abbott 
s 1884 novel Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimesnions.

348.21] Patou: a Paris couture house founded by Jean Patou (1887-1936), French
dressmaker and designer.

349.7] thought it was Moonglow but it s that damned Tchaikowski thing:  
Moonglow  was a 1934 song made popular in the 1950s by Morris Stoloff and His
Orchestra; apparently based on Tchaikowski s 1812 Overture (see Coach Vogel s
remarks on 342.5-8).

351.16] Off with that weary coronet [...] John Donne: from his Elegy 19:  To
His Mistress Going to Bed   where it reads  wiry,  not  weary. 
 352.32] Berg: Alban Berg (1885-1935), Austrian composer known as
 pioneer of atonal and 12-tone music. For biography and more:
 http://w3.rz-berlin.mpg.de/cmp/berg.html

 353.15] Brisingamen: see 282.22. 

 354.30] Joan Bennett when she dyed her hair black [Victoria
 Harding]:  the stage and film actress (1910-1990); the reference is
 perhaps to Dark Shadows, a supernatural soap opera on TV, though in
 most movie stills and publicity photos of the actress she has dark
 hair; Angel can remember her in Little Women (1933) and other early
 films in which she was blonde.

 355.21] Nathan Wise: cf. Lessing s Nathan the Wise (1779), a
 dramatic poem in five acts on toleration.

 373.7] Anton Dvorák s sev . . .: Czech composer (1841-1904); his
 Seventh Symphony has never attained the popularity of his Ninth (the
 New World).

 383.1] meat in the hall, a bin of wine, a living river by the door:
 from the  Envoy  to Robert Louis Stevenson s Underwoods (1887):

     Go, little book, and wish to all
     Flowers in the garden, meat in the hall,
     A bin of wine, a spice of wit,
     A house with lawns enclosing it,
     A living river by the door,
     A nightingale in the sycamore!
     (ODQ).

 388.1] Rhoda with the burning bush: reference unknown.

 388.2] Traité de mécanique: a 1774 work edited by the Abbé Marie of
 the Collége Mazarin; it is remembered now for the articles by French
 mathematician Adrien Legendre (1752-1833).

 388.3] Bess the landlord s daughter, plaiting a dark red loveknot:
 the last line of Alfred Noyes s (1880-1958) poem  The Highwayman  (
 ODQ).  

 388.7 "black cascade of perfume came tumbling over his breast" from
 the same source as 388.3 above, Alfred Noyes's "The Highwayman". 
 See
 http://www.potw.org/archive/potw85.html .
 [MR]

 388.16] deep-browed [...] On First Looking into Chapman s Homer:
 Keats s famous sonnet. Why did Gaddis choose this sonnet to test the
 Reading Dynamics claim?  David Kennedy, a former writer for the
 Harvard Lampoon, writes:  Among other tribulations, Lampoon
 initiates are required to memorize Keats s sonnet and be able to
 recite it at top speed -- in the time it takes for an ordinary match
 to burn down.  Gaddis joined the Lampoon staff in 1943.

 389.39] the self who could do more: a phrase from The Recognitions,
 used to describe Wyatt s emblematic role in the novel.

 390.11] comes back to tell us all: see 284.19.

 390.27] Saint Fiacre [...] last big offensive: based on the Ardennes
 offensive (the Battle of the Bulge) in World War II;  Saint Fiacre 
 is St. Vith,  Blaufinger  is General Hasso von Manteuffel, and  
 General Box  perhaps General R. W. Hasbrouck.

 391.14] Faust: Goethe s famous drama (1808, 1832).

 392.5] Hippolytus: the illegitimate son of Theseus with whom Theseus
   wife Phaedra falls in love; see Euripides  play of the same name.

 393.23] decline from status to contract: Gaddis may have first come
 upon this concept in Richard Hofstadter s Social Darwinism in
 American Thought (1944; rev. ed. Boston: Beacon, 1955), a book he
 later taught at Bard. Hofstadter quotes William Graham Sumner s
 explanation of the concept on pp. 7-8.

 393.42] Türschluss syndrome: as Gibbs reveals a few lines later, a
 play on the phrase  Schließ die Tür  (Ger.  Shut the door ). Gaddis 
 s German translator Klaus Modick notes that the term is derived from
 Torschluss-Panik, literally panic of closed doors/gates, meaning  
 the fear of being or coming or arriving too late for something, a
 fear that produces a certain feeling of panic. It s used a great
 deal [for] metaphoric means, for example for someone who realizes
 that he s getting too old to get married and does marry  the next
 best person  because of his  Torschluß-Panik.  When Gaddis puts this
 term on a whole generation which panics because it comes too late to
 do its things worth doing he probably coins something like  the lost
 generation.   Torschlusspanik is also the title of a radio play
 Gaddis wrote (taken from the opening pages of Agapé Agape) for
 DeutschlandRadio in 1998.

 393.44] all sad words of tongue or pen: from John Greenleaf Whittier
  s (1807-92) poem  Maude Muller :  For all sad words of tongue or
 pen, / The saddest are these:  It might have been!   (ODQ).

 396.32] the Duke who this great fight did win [...] Southey: from
 Robert Southey s (1774-1843) once-famous poem  The Battle of
 Blenheim  (ODQ).

 396.40] my name is Death, the last best friend am I: from Southey s
  The Dream  (from Carmen Nuptiale,  The Lay of the Laureate ); in
 the ODQ this quotation directly follows that above.

 397.21] Malleus Maleficarum, Hexenhammer: i.e.,  The Witches 
 Hammer,  a notorious book on witchcraft compiled by Kramer and
 Sprenger in 1486, consisting of questions and answers. Gaddis used
 it occasionally in The Recognitions.

 398.11] Paul and Virginia: from Paul et Virginie (1787), the famous
 idyllic romance by French writer Jacques Henri Bernardin de
 Saint-Pierre (1737-1814).

 398.14] it may be asked [...] belonged to a parish priest: from Rev.
 Montague Summers s translation of the Malleus Maleficarum (1928;
 rpt. New York: Dover, 1971), 121.

 398.39] stringer whereon mad thingers: see 131.3.

 399.10] Abraham Lincoln walks at midnight: from Vachel Lindsay s
 famous poem (1914) of the same name.

 400.41] things in the saddle and ride mankind: from Emerson s  Ode
 (Inscribed to W. H. Channing),  ll. 50-51 (ODQ). 

 401.15] five Jones boys [...] sin cojones: a bilingual pun Gaddis
 first used in The Recognitions (802.1):  los cinco Jones  sounds in
 Spanish like los sin cojones  those without balls. 

 403.5] Kurt Weill: German composer (1900-50).

 403.11] mother in Solomon s: see 1 Kings 3:16-28.

 403.30] Wiener on communication, more complicated the message more
 [...] chance for errors: see Wiener s The Human Use of Human Beings
 (1950; rev. 1954) Gaddis s source for entropy, the Second Law of
 Thermodynamics, Josiah Willard Gibbs, and information theory in
 general.

 407.16] Traviata: famous opera by Verdi (1853), based on Dumas s La
 Dame aux camélias.

 407.17] little Hexenritt from Hansel and Gretel:  Witches  Ride, 
 the prelude to act 2 of Engelbert Humperdinck s 1893 opera.

 407.22] Che volo d'augelli from Pagliacci: Nedda's ballatella in act
 l, scene 2 of Leoncavallo's 1892 opera.

 407.26] Se vuol ballare from Figaro: Figaro s aria in act 1 of
 Mozart s The Marriage of Figaro (1786; the Italian is quoted in
 Kobbé [26]).

 407.27] Anvil chorus: from act 2, scene 1 of Verdi s Il trovatore
 (1853).

 407.33] witches can t weep: Malleus Maleficarum, p. 227.

 408.8] witch takes this virgin up to a room where she: from the
 Malleus Maleficarum (97):

 Another virgin living in the diocese of Strasburg confessed to one
 of us that she was alone on a certain Sunday in her father s house,
 when an old woman of that town came to visit her and, among other
 scurrilous words, made the following proposition; that, if she
 liked, she would take her to a place where there were some young men
 unknown to all the townsmen. And when, said the virgin, I consented,
 and followed her to her house, the old woman said,  See, we go
 upstairs to an upper room where the young men are; but take care not
 to make the sign of the Cross.  I gave my promise not to do so, and
 as she was going before me and I was going up the stairs, I secretly
 crossed myself. At the top of the stairs, when we were both standing
 outside the room, the hag turned angrily upon me and with a horrible
 countenance, and looking at me said,  Curse you! Why did you cross
 yourself? Go away from here. Depart in the name of the devil.  And
 so I returned unharmed to my home.

 408.13] Heart of Darkness [...] takes her picture and letters back
 to her: at the end of Conrad s 1899 novella, Marlow visits Mrs.
 Kurtz to return her husband s effects. Instead of telling her Kurtz 
 s true last words ( The horror! The horror! ), Marlow lies and tells
 her that her name was his last word. See 631.11 below.

 411.21] in wild surmise: from Keats: see 388.19.

 412.18] Council of Nicaea [...] banished Arius to Illyricum [...]
 like substance: Arius was a 4th-century theologian who argued Christ
 was of like substance but not the same as God; the Nicaean Council
 (325) insisted Christ was of same substance and banished Arius. Cf.
 The Recognitions, p. 9.

 413.22] when you re alone [...] Hoo hoo : from the  full chorus  at
 the end of Eliot s  Fragment of an Agon  (Sweeney Agonistes), p. 84
 in The Complete Poems and Plays 1909-1950 (1952). [Joseph Tabbi]

 415.10] Begin the Beguine: words and music by Cole Porter,
 introduced by June Knight in the musical Jubilee (1935) but made
 famous the following year by Artie Shaw and His Orchestra.

 418.6] Klamm in The Castle: the Chief in Kafka s posthumously
 published novel (1926), an interview with whom the protagonist seeks
 unsuccessfully throughout the novel. More information about author
 and work at http://www.kafka.org.

 418.39] the medium and the message: The Medium Is the Message (1967)
 is Marshall McLuhan s book on mass communications.

 429.18] eighty-third Congress: active during Eisenhower s first
 term.

 429.19] Klamaths and the Menomi: Native American Indian tribes. 

 440.7] Trilby [...] he can t get at them: 1894 novel by George du
 Maurier (1834-96) about an artists  model who falls under the
 hypnotic influence of Svengali. But the passage Crawley describes
 occurs instead in du Maurier s 1891 novel Peter Ibbetson.

 447.28] Don t Fence Me In: see 218.25.

 448.5] Trilby: see 440.7.

 449.4] to make them see, above all to make them feel: Crawley
 perhaps inadvertently (but Gaddis deliberately) is echoing Joseph
 Conrad in his preface to The Nigger of the  Narcissus :  My task
 which I am trying to achieve is, by the power of the written word,
 to make you hear, to make you feel it is, before all, to make you
 see! 

 449.6] simplify Mister Bast. Simplify:  Simplify, simplify  Thoreau
 likewise urges in the second chapter of Walden.
 463.37] a man s mind can turn loose and soar: possibly a quotation; repeated a
 few more times in the novel.

 463.41] He that loves a rosy cheek: from Thomas Carew s (1595?-1640) poem  
 Disdain Returned :  He that loves a rosy cheek, / Or a coral lip admires, / Or,
 from star-like eyes, doth seek / Fuel to maintain his fires; / As old Time
 makes these decay, / So his flames must waste away  (ODQ).

 463.41]The cheek that doth not fade too much gazed at: from Keats s  Fancy :  
 Where s the cheek that doth not fade, / Too much gaz d at? Where s the maid /
 Whose lip mature is ever new?  (ODQ).

 464.3] resting on one white hand a warm wet cheek: from Walter Savage Landor s
 (1775-1864)  Proud Word You Never Spoke : 

     Proud word you never spoke, but you will speak
     Four not exempt from pride some day.
     Resting on one white hand a warm wet cheek
        Over my open volume you will say,
        "This man loved me!" then rise and trip away.          (ODQ

 464.13] bracelet of bright hair about the bone: from Donne s  The Relic,  first
 stanza (ODQ).

 464.15] hide myself not hide my face in thee: from  Rock of Ages  (see 318-19).

 464.16] what never was can have no end: source unknown.

 464.17] How her pure and eloquent blood spoke in her cheeks and so distinctly
 wrought:  [...] That one might almost say, her body thought  from Donne s  Of
 the Progress of the Soul, Second Anniversary,  ll. 244-46 (ODQ).

 464.19] One moment of happiness, the Russian said? [...] enough to last the
 whole of a man s life: the concluding lines of Dostoyevsky s novella White
 Nights (1848).

 464.20] blow winds and crack your cheeks: from King Lear (3.2.1).

 471.9] Erebus: personification of darkness; in Greek mythology, the son of
 Chaos and brother of Night; also, a ship mentioned near the beginning of Conrad
  s Heart of Darkness.

 476.5] Pope says to get away: untraced.

 476.43] chance favors the prepared mind: French chemist Louis Pasteur
 (1822-1895) once said,  In the fields of observation, chance favors only the
 mind that is prepared. 

 477.9] went to the woods to live deliberately Thoreau says: Walden, chap. 2.

 477.31] Lin Yutang: Chinese writer and philologist (1895-1976). Gaddis is
 probably quoting Cyril Connolly (see p. 32 of Gaddis s  The Rush for Second
 Place,  Harper s, April 1981) needs checking.

 479.1] I see crowds of people [...] pockets full of currants: from Eliot s The
 Waste Land.

 479.9] We won t worry what to do [...] won t go home when it: from the song by
 Klipstein and Krumpacker in Eliot s  Fragment of an Agon  (Sweeney Agonistes),
 p. 82 in The Complete Poems and Plays. {Joseph Tabbi}

 480.26] déjeuner sur l herbe: title of a famous painting by Edouard Manet
 (1832-83) depicting a nude woman having lunch on the grass with several clothed
 men; caused a scandal when first shown and still still considered to have
 multiple and controversial meanings as this recent critical work attests. A
 large image of the painting is here.

 484.9] Butterfield eight: a Manhattan telephone exchange, used by John O Hara
 as the title of a novel (1935).

 485.20] B F Skinner: American psychologist and writer (1904-1990), a
 behaviorist who advocated  operant conditioning  to control human behavior (see
 his novel Walden Two [1948]). His  mechanization  of education outraged most
 humanists.

 485.23] nature s symmetry [...] Physical Review Letters: later identified as an
 article entitled  Flaw in Nature s Symmetry?  and similar to a front-page New
 York Times article by Walter Sullivan entitled  Physicists Uphold Change in
 Theory  (27 June 1966, 1, 70). The article in Physical Review Letters appeared
 the same day.

 486.1] The unswerving punctuality of chance: a phrase appearing near the end of
 Thomas Wolfe's Look Homeward, Angel (1929)

     "Then I of yours the seeming, Ben? Your flesh is dead and buried in these
     hills: my unimprisoned soul haunts through the million streets of life,
     living its spectral nightmare of hunger and desire. Where, Ben? Where is
     the world?"

     "Nowhere,' Ben said. "You are your world."

     Inevitable catharsis by the threads of chaos. Unswerving punctuality of
     chance. Apexical summation, from the billion deaths of possibility, of
     things done.
     (Scribner softcover edition, p. 520)

 Gaddis told Steven Moore he heard the phrase used by a fellow Harvard classmate
 in the 1940s; it appears in all five of his novels: R 9.5, JR 486.1, CG 233.3,
 FHO 50.34, 258.4, AA 63.1. – Travis Dunn

 486.2] A bat as a mouse s idea of an angel: source unknown.

 486.3] How less like anyone we can be than unlike ourselves: identified below
 as a quotation from Pascal, but actually from Montaigne s  On the Inconstancy
 of Our Actions  (book 2, chap. 1 of the Essays). Also quoted in R (553.21) and
 FHO (545.4).

 486.4] A friendliness, as of dwarfs shaking hands, was in the air: from E. M.
 Forster s Passage to India (1924), chap. 29. The phrase describes the final
 meeting in India of Cyril Fielding and Adela Quested, at which a superficial
 reconciliation is reached.

 486.5] The total depravity of inanimate things - E. M. Forster: in fact though
 this has been attributed to various hands, it seems to be the title of a
 well-known essay in the Atlantic Monthly magazine of September 1864 by
 Katharine Kent Child Walker, the fuller quotation being:

     I believe in the total depravity of inanimate things... the elusiveness of
     soap, the knottiness of strings, the transitory nature of buttons, the
     inclination of suspenders to twist and of hooks to forsake their lawful
     eyes, and cleave only unto the hairs of their hapless owner's head.

 It appears in various collections of quotations. The full text is on line is
 here, and a brief biography of the author is here. [VH]

 486.6]Taine's "le con d une femme  as the axis round which everything turns:
 Hippolyte Adolphe Taine (1828-93), French philosopher and critic.In Frank
 Harris's My Life and Loves (1922-27), the American journalist's sexually
 explicit memoirs reprinted by Grove Press in 1963, Harris recalls an occasion
 when someone asked "what Taine thought of the idea that all the worlds and
 planets and solar systems were turning round one axis and moving to some divine
 fulfillment (accomplishment) . Taine, who always disliked windy rhetoric,
 remarked quietly, 'The only axis in my knowledge round which everything moves
 to some accomplishment is a woman's cunt (le con d'une femme)" (197).

 486.8] Who uses whom? (LENIN?): untraced.. (Gaddis used this again in his Saul
 Bellow review.)

 486.9] Of the soul being set before its maker [...] (K. MANSFIELD): a passage
 from Mansfield s review of E. V. Lucas s novel Verena in the Midst in the
 Atheneum for 10 September 1920, reprinted in her Novels and Novelists, ed. J.
 Middleton Murray (1930). Quoted three times in The Recognitions; see my Reader 
 s Guide, p. 156, for the full quotation.

 486.11] To see clearly and be able to do nothing (HERACLITUS): the Greek
 philosopher flourished in the 6^th-5^th centuries B.C.; quotation untraced.

 486.12] As if the roots of the earth [...] Keats, from a letter to J. H.
 Reynolds dated 9 April 1818, commenting on the rainy weather in Devonshire (ODQ
 ).

 486.13] Lady Brute: that may be an error in the translation: in Sir John
 Vanburgh s (1664-1726) play The Provok d Wife, Belinda remarks,  Ay, but you
 know we must return good for evil,  to which Lady Brute replies,  That may be a
 mistake in the translation  (ODQ).

 486.14] Growing up as a difficult thing which few survive (HEMINGWAY?):
 untraced.

 486.17] The melancholia of things completed: from section 277 of Nietzsche s
 Beyond Good and Evil; quoted twice in The Recognitions.

 486.18]His heart yearning [...] (T. E. LAWRENCE): chap. 57 of Lawrence s Seven
 Pillars of Wisdom (1926) ends:  The crowd wanted book-heroes, and would not
 understand how more human old Auda was because, after battle and murder, his
 heart yearned towards the defeated enemy now subject, at his free choice, to be
 spared or killed: and therefore never so lovely.  Auda abu Tayi, one of the
 most celebrated warriors of his time, worked closely with Lawrence to mount the
 Arab Revolt.

 486.23]Beware women who blow on knots: the sign of a witch; the advice is given
 in the Koran (sura 113) and is noted in Frazer s Golden Bough (chap. 21 in the
 abridged edition).

 486.24] That a work of art has a beginning, middle and end, life is all middle:
 Aristotle writes:  A whole is that which has beginning, middle, and end  (
 Poetics, chap. 7); the riposte is untraced.

 486.26] There is a saying [...] (C. M. DOUGHTY, TRAVELS IN ARABIA DESERTA):
 Charles M. Doughty s (1843-1926) famous Travels (1888) recounts his travels in
 a baroque, unique style; the present quotation is from chap. 2, which gives
 this description of the inhabitants of Maan (a small town in Jordan, a rest
 station Doughty stayed at on the Haj the annual pilgrimage from Damascus to
 Mecca):

 There is a saying, if any stranger enquire of the first met of Maan, were it
 even a child,  Who is here the sheykh?  he would answer him  I am he.  They are
 very factious light heads, their minds are divided betwixt supine recklessness
 and a squalid avarice. When I formerly lodged here I heard with discomfort of
 mind their hourly squabbling, as it were rats in a tub, with loud wrangling
 over every trifle as of fiends in the end of the world.  (New York: Random
 House, 1947, p. 73)

 The quotation was originally intended as the epigraph to J R.

 486.30] It is true [...] cheated into some fine passages, but: assessing
 himself in a letter to B. R. Haydon (dated 8 March 1819), Keats wrote:  I am
 three and twenty with little knowledge and middling intellect. It is true that
 in the height of enthusiasm I have been cheated into some fine passages; but
 that is not the thing  (so reads ODQ, Gaddis s source; other editors read the
 last three words as  nothing ).

 486.32] Gogol s character [...] gaping hole in humanity: Nikolai Gogol thus
 describes the miser Plyushkin in chap. 6 of his novel Dead Souls (1842).

 490.17] all her eloquent blood spoke in her cheeks: see 464.17.

 490.34] Lawrence s old warrior Auda [...] yearning toward the defeated enemy:
 see 486.18.

 492.24] Türschluss generation: see 393.42.

 493.4] what immortal hand or eye: from Blake s  The Tyger,  first stanza.

 494.8] love means being able to say you re sorry: a take-off on Erich Segal s
 line in Love Story (1970),  Love means never having to say you re sorry. 

 494.29]cleaner greener maiden [...] neater sweeter land: the British soldier in
 Kipling s poem  Mandalay,  disappointed after returning to England, boasts:  I 
 ve a neater, sweeter maiden in a cleaner, greener land!  (ODQ).

 495.8] one hand resting white on a warm cheek wet: see 464.3.

 496.20] Tripler s: an exclusive men s haberdashery on 44^th and Vanderbilt in
 Manhattan. {Peter Wolfe}

 498.5] sending people by telegraph [...] recreated somewhere else: a notion
 advanced at the end of chap. 5 of Wiener s The Human Use of Human Beings.

 498.39]Minuet in G: a popular piece from Bach's "Notenbüchlein für Anna
 Magdalena Bach" (BWV Anh. 114). [AZ]

 501.5] too much gazed at: see 463.41.

 502.1] the English suicide left the note too many buttons to button and
 unbutton: source unknown.

 504.25] sculptor [...] who called beauty the promise of function: American
 sculptor Horatio Greenough (1805-52) announced his manifesto as  By Beauty I
 mean the promise of function. / By action I mean the presence of function. / By
 character I mean the record of function  (The Travels, Observations, and
 Experiences of a Yankee Stonecutter [1852]).

 504.31] bracelet of dark hair: see 464.13.

 508.36] Ay Beamis sí! [...] Esperame!: Span.:  Yes, Beamish! It s not me but
 that s not important, right? Because I m in agreement with you, yes sir, and
 the blonde? your wife? Cunt . . . What a terrific ass, look how she has the ass
 and the [ ? ] . . . And the bosom as nice as well but lacks sympathy [see
 489.1], permit me to feel inside, madam? . . . Wait for me! Wait for me!  

 515.19] I CHOSE ROTTEN GIN [...]  D O Lobeer: the titles are approximate
 anagrams of The Recognitions, and most of the quotations are from its original
 reviews: see In Recognition of William Gaddis, p. 18, n.28 for details.

 516.8] Ethan Frome: title of a short novel by Edith Wharton (1911).

 516.16] The Blood in the Red White and Blue: the title of the Civil War film in
 FHO.  

 518.39] bringing the world into the classroom [...] educator Thomas Dewey:
 American philosopher and educator (1859-1952), whose scientific realism springs
 from William James s pragmatism; source of quotation untraced; perhaps from his
 Democracy and Education (1916).

 521.10] middle of winter: sounds plagiarized from Cheyenne Winter by Mari
 Sandoz (1953), made into a popular movie in 1964.

 524.42] the Blue Danube: the well-known Strauss waltz.

 526.9] Bradley and Ike: Omar Nelson Bradley (1893-1981) served under Eisenhower
 in World War II.  

 527.10] Frigicom: the notion of sounds frozen and then allowed to thaw out at
 sea is anticipated in Rabelais  Gargantua and Pantagruel; in book 4, chaps.
 55-56, the voyaging Pantagruel reaches the Frozen Sea, where the clamor of a
 battle, frozen into sound shards during the previous winter, thaws out with
 noisy results similar to those reported later in J R (673).

 527.36] Pater's line [...] Venice as frozen music: untraced; ODQ records F.W.J.
 Schelling's observation  Architecture in general is frozen music. 

 529.19] clean well lighted place: title of a famous short story by Hemingway.

 536.24] all s right with the world: from part 1 of Browning s drama Pippa
 Passes (ODQ).

 545.3] Cosima: Wagner s second wife (1837-1930), daughter of Franz Liszt, and
 director of the Bayreuth festivals until 1908.

 545.7] Tristan: Wagner s opera Tristan und Isolde (1859, first performed 1865).

 545.7] Charon: in Greek mythology, the ferryman who transported the spirit
 across the river Styx into Elysium.

 545.36] Crabbed age and youth:  Crabbed age and youth cannot live together: /
 Youth is full of pleasance, age is full of care  Shakespeare, The Passionate
 Pilgrim (ODQ). Crabbed Age and Youth is also the title of a book by Robert
 Louis Stevenson (ODQ).

 545.37] South Wind [...] Nepenthe: Norman Douglas s 1917 novel South Wind is
 set on the island of Nepenthe (modeled after Capri).

 547.5] Rameau [...] The Gnat: Jean Philippe Rameau (1683-1764), French
 composer.  The Gnat  (Le Moucheron) is actually by Rameau s contemporary,
 François Couperin (1668-1733), from his Pièces de Clavecin, book 2.

 547.35] Beethoven [...] heartrending will [...] Second Symphony: the will is
 translated in Thayer s Life (304-5) and is indeed heartrending; at one point
 the composer writes:  But what a humiliation for me when someone standing next
 to me heard a flute in the distance and I heard nothing, or someone heard a
 shepherd singing and again I heard nothing. Such incidents drove me almost to
 despair, a little more of that and I would have ended my life it was only my
 art that held me back. Ah, it seemed to me impossible to leave the world until
 I had brought forth all that I felt was within me. 

 560.5] big sea water [...] Minnehaha, in, in Hia: in Longfellow s long poem The
 Song of Hiawatha (1855), Minnehaha is Hiawatha s wife. Big-Sea-Water = Lake
 Superior.

 571.5] Le commissionaire du, du mal oui? . . . plus tard bon pas de quoi:  Good
 God . . .:  The commissioner of, of evil -- what? It's a country?  Yes all
 right good no offense damn it what do you . . . who me? Me I'm ahm, I'm his
 assistant, yes, Mr. Bast isn't here, but I . . . Urgent yes but I . . . from
 what catalogue . . . ? Red and green, for what? Ray X? Don't see one here no I
 don't . . . I'll certainly tell Mr. [Bast] that you are rushed when he re . . .
 [returns] yes well look listen God damn it what do you want me to what do you .
 . .  What? A good bargain yes but you mean buy everything . . . ? Agree an
 exact price but the inventory for the whole . . .? All at once fine see what I
 can . . . who me? My name's ahm, yes my name's Grynszpan, yes Mr. Grynszpan . .
 . good, if you ... much later good about what good God . . .  [trans. John
 Soutter].

 571.38] Hull House: famous social settlement established in Chicago in 1899 by
 Jane Addams (1860-1935).  

 571.40] Jack London: American writer (1876-1916), greatly influenced by
 Spencer, Darwin, and Marx.

 571.40] Spencer s immutable law: survival of the fittest from Herbert Spencer s
 (1820-1903) Principles of Biology. Spencer s popularity in nineteenth-century
 America is discussed throughout Hofstadter s Social Darwinism in American
 Thought (see 393.23).

 571.40 "Give me the fact, man!  The irrefragable fact!":  from Jack London, The
 Iron Heel, chapter 1: 
 http://sunsite.berkeley.edu/London/Writings/IronHeel/chapter1.htm
 [MR] 

     I shall not describe the whole evening, though it is a joy to me to recall
     every moment, every detail, of those first hours of my coming to know
     Ernest Everhard.

     Battle royal raged, and the ministers grew red-faced and excited,
     especially at the moments when Ernest called them romantic philosophers,
     shadow-projectors, and similar things. And always he checked them back to
     facts. `The fact, man, the irrefragable fact!' he would proclaim
     triumphantly, when he had brought one of them a cropper. He bristled with
     facts. He tripped them up with facts, ambuscaded them with facts, bombarded
     them with broadsides of  facts.

 571.42] Maggie the Girl of the Streets: Stephen Crane s 1893 novella about
 Bowery slum life (but A rather than the).  

 571.43] John Dewey [...] close and intimate acquaintance got with nature at
 first: in chapter 1 of  The School and Society (1899), Dewey writes:  Again, we
 cannot overlook the importance for educational purposes of the close and
 intimate acquaintance got with nature at first hand, with real things and
 materials, with the actual processes of their manipulation, and the knowledge
 of their social necessities and uses  from Dewey on Education, edited by Gaddis
  s close friend Martin S. Dworkin (NY: Teachers College Press, 1959), 37.

 573.16] Madame Bernhardt [...] photographed in a yellow mackintosh as ungainly
 as his [...] Wilde: more from  Impressions of America  (see 288.45).

 573.40] thing of Granados: Enrique Granados Campina (1867-1916), Spanish
 pianist and composer.

 575.29] Horatio Alger [...] Ragged Dicks: see 21.41; Ragged Dick was the
 boy-hero of a number of Alger s novels.

 575.42] a century labeled one of the most fascinating chapters [...] by [...]
 Reverend Newell Dwight Millis: actually Hillis: American clergyman and activist
 (1858-1929), author of over two dozen books; source of quotation unknown (cf.
 AA 83.18, where his surname is spelled correctly, as it is in RSP 11). .

 576.7] Mark Twain saw them through a glass eye, darkly: apparently a reference
 (via 1 Cor. 13:12) to the misanthropy that darkens Twain s later writings.

 577.19] the first book he took: Broch s Sleepwalkers: see 629.40.

 578.9] place is like Kafka s: in The Castle (see 418.6), the official Sordini
 works in a similar chaotic room (chap. 5).

 579.9] tripods of Hephaestus: see 585.22.
 581.20] Dewey [...]most awkward writer in the God damned language, break
 off in the middle of one of his clumsy God damned sentences don't even
 notice it: see 571.43; in his introduction, Dworkin writes baldly, "Dewey
 wrote badly" (13).

 581.26] William James [...] what worked into a philosophy: James's
 pragmatism is basically a philosophy of "what works."

 581.27] E L Thorndike [...] Animal Intelligence: 1911 book by Edward Lee
 Thorndike (1874-1949), American psychologist and teacher, author also of
 The Measurement of Intelligence.

 581.32] F W Taylor: Frederick Winslow Taylor (1856-1915), American
 efficiency engineer.

 581.34] Mary Baker Eddy: (1821-1910), founder of Christian Science.

 584.9] Go lovely Rose: from Edmund Waller's (1606-87) "Song:  Go Lovely
 Rose!'" (ODQ).

 584.10] Elena in Turgenev's On the Eve: the serious young heroine of the
 Russian writer's third novel (1859), with whom three men are in love. She
 settles for a patriotic Bulgarian, and after his premature death carries
 on his revolutionary work.

 584.14] Gluck's underworld: see 235.2.

 584.15] beware women who blow on knots: see 486.23.

 584.16] perhaps it was right [...] kick me downstairs: from Isaac
 Bickerstaffe's (1733-1808?) poem "An Expostulation" (ODQ).

 584.17] No book heroine [...] heart yearning: see 486.18.

 585.22] Aristotle's kingdom [...] tripods of Hephaestus, which, says the
 poet: (quotation completed at 594.18): distinguishing between living
 instruments and lifeless (e.g., the pilot and his rudder), Aristotle
 writes in Politics: "For if every instrument could accomplish its own
 work, obeying or anticipating the will of others, like the statues of
 Daedalus, or the tripods of Haphaestus, which, says the poet,  of their
 own accord entered the assembly of the Gods' [Homer's Iliad 18:376]; if,
 in like manner, the shuttle would weave and the plectrum touch the lyre
 without a hand to guide them, chief workmen would not want servants, nor
 masters slaves" (book 1, chap. 4; trans. Benjamin Jowett).

 588.2] Diderot: Denis Diderot (1713-84), French writer who attempted to
 encompass all knowledge in his famous encyclopedia.

 588.37] Robert the Bruce: Robert I, called "the Bruce" (his family name),
 king of Scotland from 1306 to 1329.

 589.2] seize the day: from the last line of Horace's 11th ode, book 1;
 also the title of a novella by Saul Bellow.

 594.20] shuttle would weave [...] to guide them: see 585.22.

 594.22] how for art's sake Wilde had faced Leadville's bullies: see
 288.45.

 597.16] jumping for joy in the womb Mary visiting Elisa: see Luke
 1:40-44.

 597.42] Cruden's Concordance: a standard Bible reference book, used by
 Gaddis in all of his novels.

 604.11] Pater's recipe for success in life: "To burn always with this
 hard, gemlike flame, to maintain this ecstasy, is success in life" (The
 Renaissance, "Conclusion")(ODQ).

 604.28] mildewed chump think Crane call Wilde: Crane's first biographer
 Thomas Beer records this observation from a letter on the London literary
 scene in Stephen Crane: A Study in American Letters (New York: Knopf,
 1923), 327.

 605.20] laughing string [...] place of stone: see 131.3.

 606.30] Old Foes With New Faeces: Gaddis later published an essay
 entitled "Old Foes with New Faces" (Yale Review, 1995), in which he
 explains his title is taken from Charles Kingsley's novel Hypatia, or New
 Foes with an Old Face (1853).

 606.37] strip you naked tear you up with oyster shells: the fate of
 Hypatia in Kingsley's novel. Also see Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the
 Roman Empire Chapter XLVII: 'Ecclesiastical Discord': "On a fatal day, in
 the holy season of Lent, Hypatia was torn from her chariot, stripped
 naked, dragged to the church, and inhumanly butchered by the hands of
 Peter the reader, and a troop of savage and merciless fanatics: her flesh
 was scraped from her bones with sharp cyster shells, and her quivering
 limbs were delivered to the flames. The just progress of inquiry and
 punishment was stopped by seasonable gifts; but the murder of Hypatia has
 imprinted an indelible stain on the character and religion of Cyril of
 Alexandria." [JS/SM]

 606.46] Taine write your jacket blurb: see 486.6.

 607.7] too late [...] fairies spent it: see 488.2-4?

 608.4] Bruckner's eighth symphony: in c minor (1887); the notes are from
 the scherzo.

 614.2] neater sweeter maiden: see 494.29.

 614.45] what the young man from Racine invented [...] to fit either sex:
 "There was a young man from Racine / Who invented a fucking machine; /
 Concave or convex, / It would fit either sex, / And was perfectly simple
 to clean."

 615.4] Beefy face and grubby hand: also from Kipling's "Mandalay": "Tho'
 I walks with fifty 'ousemaids outer Chelsea to the Strand, / An' they
 talks a lot o' lovin', but wot do they understand? / Beefy face an'
 grubby 'and  / Law! Wot do they understand? / I've got a neater, sweeter
 maiden in a cleaner, greener land!"

 618.35] Bob Jones U: an ultra-conservative, anti-Catholic, quasi-racist
 school in South Carolina.

 619.14] Gluck's Orfeo [...] Che faro senza Euridice: see 235.2; "What
 will I do without Eurydice?" Orfeo sings in his famous aria in the fourth
 act.

 619.41] David Smith: American sculptor (1906-64), one of the first to
 work in welded metals.

 621.13] Hart Crane there is a world dimensional for those untwisted [...]
 the world dimen: from the American poet's (1899-1932) "For the Marriage
 of Faustus and Helen" (1923): "There is the world dimensional for / those
 untwisted by the love of things / irreconcilable . . ." (ll. 16-18).

 621.36] Tolstoy [...] what I could do: see 248.36.

 622.23] that great line of Pascal's about toothache: Blaise Pascal's
 (1623-1662) only mathematical work produced after retiring was the essay
 on the cycloid, the curve traced by a point on the circumference of a
 rolling circle, in 1658. He was suffering from sleeplessness and
 toothache when the idea occurred to him, and to his surprise his teeth
 immediately ceased to ache. Regarding this as a divine intimation to
 proceed with the problem, he worked incessantly for eight days at it, and
 completed a tolerably full account of the geometry of the cycloid,
 solving the problem of the area of any segment of the cycloid and the
 center of gravity of any segment; he also solved the problems of the
 volume and surface area of the solid of revolution formed by rotating the
 cycloid about the x-axis. This and more about Pascal here
 http://www.maths.tcd.ie/pub/HistMath/People/Pascal/RouseBall/
 RB_Pascal.html
 and here
 http://www.math.wichita.edu/history/men/pascal.html  [VH]

 626.17] Tolstoy play [...] the world will have to understand all by
 itself: from Redemption; assuming the protagonist Fedya is about to shoot
 himself, the drunkard Ivan Petrovich enthusiastically proclaims: "You
 will kill yourself that two people should pity you; and I I shall kill
 myself that the whole world should understand what it has lost. I won't
 hesitate, or think about it! I seize it [snatches revolver] now! And all
 is over. But it is too soon yet. [Lays down revolver] Nor shall I write
 anything; they must understand it themselves" act 4, sc. 1; trans. Louise
 and Aylmer Maude.

 627.3] vea pasar los cad veres de sus enemigos: from the Spanish proverb
 "El que se sienta en la puerta de su casa vera pasar el cad ver de su
 enemigo" (He who sits at the door of his house will see his enemy's
 corpse carried by).

 627.23] Boswell Sisters doing Down on the Delta [...] Muddy water used to
 be my playground: a hit for the New Orleans singing trio, popular in the
 1930s.

 627.31] Jack be quiet [ ] jump over the: a popular Mother Goose rhyme.

 629.40] Broch [...] Schlafwandler: Herman Broch's (1886-1951) trilogy of
 novels The Sleepwalkers (1931-32; Eng. trans. 1932). Critic Theodore
 Ziolkowski writes: "According to Broch, sleepwalkers are people living
 between vanishing and emerging ethical systems, just as the somnambulist
 exists in a state between sleeping and waking. The trilogy portrays three
 representative cases of  loneliness of the I' stemming from the collapse
 of any sustaining system of values" ("In Search of the Absolute Novel,"
 New York Times Book Review, 3 November 1985, 14). See 724.35.

 630.3] the Scungilli brothers: Possibly refers to the Flying Scungilli
 Brothers, a band which had a reunion tour in 2000. [VH] 

 630.4] Infinite riches in a little room, Merchant of Venice: actually,
 from Christopher Marlowe's The Jew of Malta (ODQ).

 631.11] he was on the threshold of great things [...] the overcast sky: a
 cluster of quotations from Heart of Darkness (see 408.13). Kurtz pleads,
 "I was on the threshold of great things" and in the same paragraph Marlow
 says of him, "He had kicked himself loose of the earth. Confound the man!
 he had kicked the very earth to pieces" (Norton Critical Edition, 2nd ed.
 [1971], 67). Marlow feels "it was written I should be loyal to the
 nightmare of my choice" (65-66), and earlier, finding himself "lumped
 along with Kurtz as a partisan of methods for which the time was not
 ripe," Marlow had said, "Ah! but it was something to have at least a
 choice of nightmares" (63; cf. 69: "It is strange how I accepted this
 unforeseen partnership, this choice of nightmares forced upon me in the
 tenebrous land invaded by these mean and greedy phantoms"). The
 references to "the lofty drawing room her pale face floating toward you
 [...] give her something to live with" are from Marlow's interview with
 Kurtz's Intended on the final pages of the novella (see the earlier
 reference on J R 408). After learning of Kurtz's death, Marlow says, "I
 remain to dream the nightmare out to the end, and to show my loyalty to
 Kurtz once more" (71), and the novella ends with a reference to "an
 overcast sky" (79).

 634.12] gentlemen of the press [...] Kipling [...] If: "If" is probably
 Kipling's best-known poem. The term "gentlemen of the press" antedates
 Kipling Disraeli used it in an 1853 speech but in his poem "The Press"
 Kipling shares Brisboy's disdain.

 635.23] Kindertotenlieder: "Songs of the Dead Children" (1905), a song
 cycle by Gustave Mahler. 

 643.24] somebody Fisher dishcloth: Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau (1925- ),
 German baritone. He sings the role of Jesus on the 1970 Archiv Produktion
 recording of Bach's 21st cantata that Bast and J R listen to later (see
 654.36 below).

 646.22] Greenspan: i.e., Grynszpan, but J R's pronunciation suggests
 Gaddis had in mind Allan Greenspan (1926- ), President Nixon's economic
 advisor (1968-74) during the period Gaddis was writing this novel.

 647.32] greasy eminence: from "eminence grise," someone exercising
 unsuspected or unofficial power.

 650.16] music hath charms to soothe the savage dot dot dot: from
 Congreve's play The Mourning Bride (ODQ).

 650.19] Harry Bosch: cf. Hieronymus Bosch (1450?-1516), Dutch painter,
 whose Seven Deadly Sins figures prominently in The Recognitions.

 652.32] what works: James's pragmatism in a nutshell; see 581.26.

 654.36] ja ach ja ich bin verlor [...] nein du hassest mich: from Bach's
 tragic 21^st cantata Ich hatte viel Bek mmernis (I have suffered
 greatly); section 8 is a dialogue between the soul (soprano) and Jesus
 (bass):

 Die Seele:                          Jesus:
 Komm, mein Jesu, und rquicke        Ja, ich komme und erquicke
 Und erfreu mit deinem               Dich mit meinem Gnadenblicke
 Blicke Diese Seele,                 Deine Seele,
 Die soll sterben                    Die soll leben
 Und nicht leben                     Und nicht sterben
 Und in ihrer Ungl cksh hle          Hier aus dieser Wundenh hle
 Ganz verderben                      Sollst du erben
 Ich muss stets in Kummer schweben,  Heil durch diesen Saft der Reben,
 Ja, ach ja, ich bin verloren!       Nein, ach nein, du bist erkoren!
 Nein, ach nein, du hassest ich!     Ja, ach ja, ich liebe dich!
 Ach Jesu, durchs sse mir eele und   Entweichet, ihr Sorgen, verschwinde,
 Herze!                              du Schmerze!
 Komm, mein Jesu, und rquicke        Ja, ich komme und erquicke
 Mich mit deinem nadenblicke!        Dich mit meinem Gnadenblicke.

                                     Jesus:
 Soul:                               Lo, I come to revive
 Come, my Jesus, and revive          With merciful regard
 And gladden with thy regard My      Thy soul.
 soul,                               It shall live
 It must die                         And not die.
 And live no more                    From this vale of pain
 And in its vale of sorrow           Thou shalt inherit
 Completely perish.                  Salvation through this wine
 I am doomed to live in anguish,     No, no indeed, thou art saved!
 Yes, indeed I am lost!              Yes, indeed I love thee
 No, indeed no, thou hatest me.      Banish sorrows, vanish care,
 Ah, Jesus, refresh my soul and      I come to revive thee
 heart!                              With my merciful favor.
 Come, my Jesus, and revive ye
 With thy merciful favor.


 658.4] To make you hear! to make you, to make you feel to try to ...  cf.
 the Preface to Joseph Conrad's The Nigger of the Narcissus: [JS]

     The sincere endeavour to accomplish that creative task, to go as far
     on that road as his strength will carry him, to go undeterred by
     faltering, weariness or reproach, is the only valid justification for
     the worker in prose. And if his conscience is clear, his answer to
     those who, in the fulness of a wisdom which looks for immediate
     profit, demand specifically to be edified, consoled, amused; who
     demand to be promptly improved, or encouraged, or frightened, or
     shocked, or charmed, must run thus: -- My task which I am trying to
     achieve is, by the power of the written word, to make you hear, to
     make you feel -- it is, before all, to make you see. That -- and no
     more, and it is everything. If I succeed, you shall find there
     according to your deserts: encouragement, consolation, fear, charm --
     all you demand; and, perhaps, also that glimpse of truth for which
     you have forgotten to ask.

 661.23] signs you can't bring any fresh ones in the cemetery: cf. Agnes
 Deigh's letter in The Recognitions:   "It is forbidden to enter the
 garden with flowers in the hand. That was a sign in french at the gate of
 a french garden, you see, and read it well and you will understand"
 (759). This notice posted at the entrance to the public garden in Tarbes
 in southern France to prevent people from stealing the garden's flowers
 and then claiming to have brought them is the subject of an allegory that
 frames Jean Paulhan's Les fleurs de Tarbes (1941); Maurice Blanchot's
 review of this critical work led to an important debate in France on the
 status of literature.

 663.1] Billy Grahey: evangelist Billy Graham (1918-    ).

                         transition (663.37-664.2)
                         Windy Massapequa terrain.

 667.9] Rain or hail fire or snow rift the hills and roll the: see 142.20.

 667.14] Trib [...] Burmesquik where they make the crooked: see 42.l6.

 667.28] Soothe the savage dot dot dot: see 650.16.

 667.28] wed some savage woman she will: see 280.39.

 667.38] Handel's Jephtha: an oratorio (based on Judges 11), first
 performed at Covent Garden in 1752

 667.39] the soprano here was singing get away! from Jephthah's daughter
 Iphis's air "Happy they! this vital breath with content I shall resign"
 from Händel's ortatorio. [AZ]

 670.28] ancient founts: Tennyson's "Locksley Hall," l. 188.

 671.10] the dreary moorland: "Locksley Hall," l. 40.

 673.42] The Red Mill by Victor Herbert: a 1906 light opera by the
 Irish-American conductor and composer (1859-1924). Given Vogel's sexual
 proclivities, Peter Wolfe suggests the selection is "Every Day Is Ladies'
 Day with Me."

 678.14] There is increasing evidence [...] wrote Doctor James Carey: from
 James Carey's The College Drug Scene (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall,
 1968), 178. {Identified by Scott Simmon in his dissertation "The Ulysses
 Tradition," 159 but see if taken from a NYT article or review of the
 book}

 682.29] Corpus Juris: Corpus Juris Civilis is the Justinian Code, the 6^
 th century codification of Roman Law and the basis for most subsequent
 law systems.

 683.39] the Perdinalies: apparently a typo for the Pedernales, a river
 and park area in Texas.

 683.39] hand you a world bank: a reference to President Johnson's
 Secretary of Defense during the Vietnam war, Robert McNamara (1916- ), as
 Gaddis's essay "The Rush for Second Place" indicates (RSP 50-51).

 684.23] Mark Twain a politician's an ass everything's sat on except a
 man: not by Twain but a two-line poem by e. e. cummings: "a politician is
 an arse upon / which everyone has sat except a man" (in 1 x 1, 1944).

 684.38] Haymarket riots: occurred in Chicago on 4 May 1886 as the result
 of a mass protest against the killing of strikers by police.

 685.42] just wanted everybody to like him: Lyndon B. Johnson: see "The
 Rush for Second Place," 35-36.

 686.20] eye of a needle: from Matthew 19:24.

 687.8] for Alise: Beethoven's "F r Elise," a bagatelle dating from 1808.

 687.36] just doing [...] you wouldn't be anybody: similar to a passage
 from Evelyn Waugh's novel Vile Bodies quoted in "The Rush for Second
 Place"; needs checking.

 690.13] Berengaria: an ocean liner of the Cunard Line; sold for scrap in
 1938.

 692.12] what the pound's been through [...] some damn dead poet: Ezra
 Pound died 1 November 1972. This and the reference to Kennecott's
 troubles on p. 214 place the novel in the fall of 1972.

 698.9] Bitterroot strike: an 1890 conflict between unionized miners and
 unscrupulous owners in Montana.

 700.28] Custer's last: see 310.37.

 700.42] Mickeysuckies: i.e., the Mikasuki (or Miccosukee), a division of
 the Seminole tribe of Native Americans.

 702.39] Eisen ruling: a Supreme Court decision handed down in June 1974.
 Here's a short article on its significance that appeared in Time magazine
 (10 June 1974), perhaps Gaddis's source, under the title "Taking Mass
 from Class":

     "Class actions have sprouted and multiplied like the leaves of the
     green bay tree," groused Federal Appeals Judge Harold Medina in 1973.
     He had just heard one of the numerous appeals that have marked the
     course of the undisputed king of mass class actions: the complex
     lawsuit brought by New York Shoe Salesman Morton Eisen on behalf of
     all persons who had bought or sold odd lots of stock (less than 100
     shares) on the New York Stock Exchange between 1962 and 1966. Last
     week, eight years after Eisen was first filed, the Supreme Court
     handed down a final ruling on the suit -- and effectively defoliated
     Medina's bay tree. From now on, class actions on behalf of large
     numbers of plaintiffs who have each suffered similar small losses
     will have practically no chance of succeeding.

     In his suit, Eisen claimed that the two brokerage firms then in
     control of odd-lot trading -- Carlisle & Jacquelin and DeCoppet &
     Doremus -- had engaged in illegal price-fixing that slightly
     increased the fee for each transaction. Eisen figured that he himself
     was only entitled to $70 in damages, but the total possible damage
     award to the likely 2 million other potential members of the class
     was estimated to be at least $7.8 million. Eisen's problem was to
     satisfy a judge that the huge, unwieldy group of odd-lot traders
     could be managed under precise rules authorized by Congress. Those
     rules were designed to ensure that all potential members of a class
     actually share the same interest. One key provision: each class
     member must be notified about the suit so that he may opt out or hire
     a lawyer to represent his viewpoint.

     Bad Burden. With millions of possible Eisen members, it was little
     wonder that one judge pronounced the suit a "Frankenstein monster
     posing as a class action." Lower courts ruling on Eisen's suit did
     seek to interpret the rules as liberally as possible so that narrow
     technicalities would not derail an otherwise valid consumer claim.
     But the Supreme Court Justices last week concluded unanimously that
     the plaintiff had to give individual notice to "all class members who
     can be identified with reasonable effort." The requirement, said
     Justice Lewis Powell for the court, "is not a discretionary
     consideration to be waived in a particular case." Furthermore, said
     Powell, the plaintiff must bear the costs of notification.

     The twin requirements impose a crushing burden. For Eisen, such costs
     could come to $272,000. If he were later to win, he could recover
     that expense as well as damages, but the initial outlay would have
     been prohibitive for a shoe salesman who makes $300 a week.

     The ruling still leaves open the possibility of smaller class
     actions, in which there are fewer and more easily accessible members.
     But the complex legal issues involved in many class actions often
     mean lawyers' fees that only a large number of plaintiffs can afford.
     "In a sense," says Attorney Raymond Bonner of Public Citizens
     Litigation Group, "what's happened here is that it's better for
     business to cheat a million people out of a dollar each than to cheat
     one person out of $1 million." Which is to say that suits like
     Eisen's, which have attacked hotel overcharges, credit-card finance
     charges and preferential air-fare charges for youths, are now
     apparently out of the question for all but the very wealthy.

 707.4] K four six six [...] a concerto of Mozart's: see 43.28.

 711.5] Coxey's Army: American businessman and politician Jacob Coxey
 (1854-1951) twice led groups of the unemployed, nicknamed Coxey's Army,
 to Washington, D.C., to demonstrate for legislation for funds to pay the
 unemployed for work on public improvements (1894 and 1914).

 712.37] to throw p v c's: premature ventricular contractions, indicating
 heart problems.

 716.15] her bosom shaken by a sudden storm of sighs: see 69.25. 

 723.2] Minuet in G: see 498.39.

 724.35] Broch's Sleepwalkers, been on page thirty-five: see 629.40. On
 page 35 of the standard English translation (by Willa and Edwin Muir),
 the protagonist attends a performance of Gounod's Faust and broods of the
 resemblance between brothers and sisters.
